R602 durable storage database groups (#3337)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/design/durable-storage.md

- **Value:** An arbitrary binary blob.

## Durable Storage Database Groups

> Starting from EMQX 6.1, Durable Storage introduces the concept of database groups to improve resource management and operational safety.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting from EMQX 6.0.2, Durable Storage introduces the concept of database groups to improve resource management and operational safety.
```

A database group provides unified management of storage resources, such as disk space and memory buffers, for one or more durable storage databases on a node.

> Database groups are an operator-level abstraction intended for managed and advanced deployments and are not typically exposed to end users. By default, each durable storage database is assigned to its own database group, named after the database, preserving the behavior of earlier releases.

Reviewer: > Database groups are an operator-level abstraction intended for managed and advanced deployments and are not typically exposed to end users. 

It _is_ exposed to all users through the configuration and metrics. I think this sentence should be removed.

Database groups do not change how data is structured or accessed. The logical data model (shards, generations, slabs, or streams) remains unchanged. They operate solely as a resource governance layer. Even when a group contains a single database, it establishes a consistent and extensible boundary for quota enforcement and resource accounting.

### Design Motivation

Persistent data in Durable Storage is stored in RocksDB Stored String Table (SST) files. While write-ahead logs are bounded in size, SST files may grow indefinitely as new data is written.

> In deployments that include multiple durable storage databases, these databases run on the same node and share physical disk resources. Without a unified resource governance mechanism, any single database may grow without bound, exhausting disk or memory resources and impacting the availability of the node and potentially the overall system.

Reviewer: This paragraph duplicates line 103. I think it's sufficient to say that database groups are used to restrict RAM and disk usage, the reader will easily figure out the reason why that could be needed.

Database groups address this issue by:

- Allowing multiple databases to share a common disk usage limit
- Enforcing write admission control before data is persisted
- Providing a foundation for group-level observability

> Each EMQX node enforces storage quotas independently. In a cluster, overall capacity must be assessed by aggregating per-node usage using external monitoring tools.

Reviewer: I think this sentence overall adds more confusion than explains things.  

- Database groups limit resource usage for all database shards that have replicas on the node. 
- When it comes to the RAM usage, the limiting is total and doesn't need any aggregation.
- When it comes to SST file space usage, simple aggregation will give confusing results due to replicas.

A database group owns and manages shared resources, including:

- Disk usage of SST files (soft quota)
- RocksDB write buffer (memtable) memory
- RocksDB background thread pools

Resource usage is tracked and enforced at the group level, not per database or per shard.

Conceptually, database groups introduce the following hierarchy:

```
Database Group
  └── Database (DB)
        └── Shards
              └── Slabs
                    └── Streams
                          └── TTV
```

## Storage Quota

Durable Storage uses soft quotas as the primary mechanism for controlling disk usage.

### Soft Quota Enforcement

Storage quotas are enforced before write transactions are accepted by the Durable Storage leader:

1. When a transaction containing writes is submitted, the leader checks the current SST disk usage of the database group.
2. The leader rejects the transaction if accepting it would exceed the quota. If the leader accepts the transaction, it is replicated and applied consistently across all replicas.

> 3. Read-only transactions continue to be accepted.

Reviewer: 4. Transactions that delete data are accepted too.

Quota enforcement occurs at the Durable Storage transaction layer and does not depend on the underlying storage engine entering a read-only state.

This design ensures that:

- Transactions exceeding the quota are rejected before being written to the WAL.
- Replication consistency is preserved across the cluster.

> - Cleanup operations that reduce disk usage remain possible.

Reviewer: This entire passage should be removed, as the previous explanation of the behavior is sufficient.

I believe it rehashes one of the early rejected design proposals, which doesn't need to be mentioned in the final design documentation.

### Behavior When Quota Is Exceeded

When a database group exceeds its storage usage:

- Write operations are rejected by the leader node.
- Read and replay operations continue to function normally.
- Cleanup operations that reduce disk usage are still allowed.

> Quota enforcement is performed **only on the leader node** of each shard. Followers do not independently enforce quotas or make admission decisions, ensuring replica consistency and preventing divergence.

Reviewer: This duplicates lines 152-156
